1. Introduction
The philosophy of mathematics plays an important role in analytic philosophy, both as a
subject of inquiry in its own right, and as an important landmark in the broader
philosophical landscape. Mathematical knowledge has long been regarded as a paradigm
of human knowledge with truths that are both necessary and certain, so giving an account
of mathematical knowledge is an important part of epistemology. Mathematical objects
like numbers and sets are archetypical examples of abstracta, since we treat such objects
in our discourse as though they are independent of time and space; finding a place for
such objects in a broader framework of thought is a central task of ontology, or
metaphysics. The rigor and precision of mathematical language depends on the fact that
it is based on a limited vocabulary and very structured grammar, and semantic accounts
of mathematical discourse often serve as a starting point for the philosophy of language.
Although mathematical thought has exhibited a strong degree of stability through history,
the practice has also evolved over time, and some developments have evoked
controversy and debate; clarifying the basic goals of the practice and the methods that are
appropriate to it is therefore an important foundational and methodological task, locating
the philosophy of mathematics within the broader philosophy of science.
In this chapter, I will try to convey a modern philosophical understanding of the subject
as it practiced today. Our contemporary understanding has been shaped by traditional
questions and concerns about the nature of mathematics, and Section 2 provides a broad
overview of the general array of philosophical positions in place by the turn of the
twentieth century. On the other hand, the nineteenth century is generally taken to
represent the birth of ‘modern’ mathematical thought, and many new issues arose with
the dramatic conceptual shifts that took place. Sections 3 and 4 summarize some of these
developments. Our contemporary philosophical understanding has also been informed by
nineteenth and twentieth century developments in mathematical logic, which can be
viewed as a reflective, mathematical study of the methods of mathematical reasoning
itself. Section 5 tries to explain what we have learned from such a study, in philosophical
terms. Finally, Sections 6 and 7 try to convey, in broad strokes, some of the central lines
of thought in the philosophy of mathematics today.
